add documentation for the pkgs.portableService tool (#193081)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/builders/images/portableservice.section.md

# pkgs.portableService {#sec-pkgs-portableService}

> `pkgs.portableService` is a function to create **"portable service images"**,

Reviewer: Please choose one highlight. Are you defining that term? Probably italics then.

as read-only, immutable, `squashfs` archives.

> systemd supports a concept of ["Portable Services"](https://systemd.io/PORTABLE_SERVICES/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
systemd supports a concept of [Portable Services](https://systemd.io/PORTABLE_SERVICES/).
```

> "Portable Services" are a delivery method for system services that uses two specific features of container management:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Portable Services are a delivery method for system services that uses two specific features of container management:
```

* Applications are bundled. I.e. multiple services, their binaries and
  all their dependencies are packaged in an image, and are run directly from it.
* Stricter default security policies, i.e. sandboxing of applications.

> This allows to use the benefits of nix, to build images for use on many recent Linux distributions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows using Nix to build images which can be run on many recent Linux distributions.
```

The primary tool for interacting with Portable Services is `portablectl`,
and they are managed by the `systemd-portabled` system service.

> > **_NOTE:_** Portable services were introduced and only supported since systemd 239 (released on 2018-06-22).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{.note}
Portable services are supported starting with systemd 239 (released on 2018-06-22).
:::
```

A very simple example of using `portableService` is described below:

[]{#ex-pkgs-portableService}

```nix
pkgs.portableService {
  pname = "demo";
  version = "1.0";
  units = [ demo-service demo-socket ];
}
```

The above example will build an squashfs archive image in `result/$pname_$version.raw`. The image will contain the

> file-system structure as required by the portable service specification, and a sub-set of the nix store with all the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
file system structure as required by the portable service specification, and a subset of the Nix store with all the
```

dependencies of the two derivations in the `units` list.

> `units` must be a list of derivations, and their names must be prefixed with the service name ("demo" in this case),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`units` must be a list of derivations, and their names must be prefixed with the service name (`"demo"` in this case).
```

> otherwise `systemd-portabled` will ignore them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Otherwise `systemd-portabled` will ignore them.
```

> > **_NOTE:_** The `.raw` file extension of the image is required by the portable services specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::{.Note}
The `.raw` file extension of the image is required by the portable services specification.
:::
```

Some other options available are:

> - `description`, `homepage`: are added to the `/etc/os-release` in the image and are shown by the portable services tooling.

Reviewer: Please make the descriptions a paragraph under each list item and capitalize it. Otherwise it will display very densely. You can omit the colon then, it doesn't add information.

Author: is this what you had in mind?

   Default to empty values, not added to os-release.
- `symlinks`:  a list of attribute sets {object, symlink}. Symlinks will be created  in the root filesystem of the image to

>    objects in the nix store. Defaults to an empty list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   objects in the Nix store. Defaults to an empty list.
```

> - `contents`: a list of additional derivations to be included in the image nix store, as-is. Defaults to an empty list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `contents`: a list of additional derivations to be included in the image Nix store, as-is. Defaults to an empty list.
```

- `squashfsTools`: defaults to `pkgs.squashfsTools`, allows you to override the package that provides `mksquashfs`.
- `squash-compression`, `squash-block-size`: options to `mksquashfs`. Default to `"xz -Xdict-size 100%"` and `"1M"` respectively.

A typical usage of `symlinks` would be:
```nix
  symlinks = [
    { object = "${pkgs.cacert}/etc/ssl"; symlink = "/etc/ssl"; }
    { object = "${pkgs.bash}/bin/bash"; symlink = "/bin/sh"; }
    { object = "${pkgs.php}/bin/php"; symlink = "/usr/bin/php"; }
  ];
```
to create these symlinks for legacy applications that assume them existing globally.

Once the image is created, and deployed on a host in `/var/lib/portables/`, you can use it as:

> ```sh

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```console
````

> # portablectl attach demo_1.0.raw

Reviewer: Does that have to be run as root? It will render as a comment right now. I suggest not adding prompts and describing in the text that root is required. Then the console input can be pasted verbatim.

Author: > Does that have to be run as root? 

yes

> I suggest not adding prompts and describing in the text that root is required. Then the console input can be pasted verbatim.

👍

# pkgs.portableService {#sec-pkgs-portableService}

> `pkgs.portableService` is a function to create _"portable service images"_,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pkgs.portableService` is a function to create _portable service images_,
```

I hadn't made a suggestion because I didn't know what you wanted to do here. Possibly also a misunderstanding, because I implicitly considered quotes a highlight as well...
